I mean President Trump looking to spend
more than a trillion dollars on
infrastructure but do we actually have a
workforce to back that up Ivanka Trump
and Wilbur Ross both speaking in a White
House Town Hall today hoping to fix the
skills gap and rebrand technical
vocational Systems training by ditching
the stigma that currently holds well at
least that leads have against it here is
Mike Rowe works from Mike Rowe Swartz
Foundation who by the way is offering
more than a half a million dollars to
get people trained in skills that are in
demand this year Mike I've been trying
to get you in a show for a long time i
got i got giddy there at the open well
I'm flattered thank you a little bit
eNOS is just what the country needs it
really is and I think we should be
getting about the prospects of a
manufacturing Renaissance but we should
be concerned and you pinpointed this a
long time ago about the ability to fill
these jobs it's just math you know and
I'm not an expert I don't want to
pretend to be one but we had 300 dirty
jobs over the course of nine years I
shot in every state half-a-dozen times
and every single employer I talked to
even at the height of the recession said
the same thing the hardest thing to do
is find people who are willing to learn
a skill that's actually in demand
I saw help wanted signs literally in
every single state in 2009 and ever
since I've been looking at the math and
saying to myself you know there just has
to be another conversation that's going
on with regards to the 5.6 million jobs
that exist that the majority of which
don't require a college degree people
for whatever reason are just not excited
about so many of those jobs go right to
what you're talking about
their construction their manufacturing
their transportation and they're sitting
there and if we don't do something about
that first and foremost I'm not really
sure how we can have a broader more
sensible conversation about unemployment
in general well Mike you know you talk
about a conversation perhaps we haven't
had a conversation maybe it's just been
you know a one-way monologue from the
elites on high that have really put a
stigma on the notion of working with
your hands and this is something I think
listen you think about the turn of the
century we tried to bring in as the
German high school elementary school
apprenticeship style and everyone who's
40 years older
or something shop class and things like
that and and I think the elite started
to look down on and as their consequence
everyone started looking down on it yeah
and it's really interesting the way it
devolved and look I don't think there
was some evil genius in the corner
twisting his mustache laughing
maniacally at some larger nefarious plan
that was unfolding I think I think a
generation of parents wanted something
better for their kids but we didn't know
what better meant and we did something
we didn't just take shop out of out of
high school we took art out of vocation
we we took the arts out of vocational
arts right and that set the stage for
really presenting an entire category of
viable jobs as some kind of consolation
prize a vocational consolation prize at
the same time in education something
similar was going on college was getting
a big PR push but that push was coming
at the expense of trade schools two-year
schools and all these other alternative
forms of education so we free up a ton
of money to lend to kids who are 17
years old who have no idea what they
want to do with the rest of their life
and we tell them that the best path for
the most people is the most expensive
path right and our in consequently we
have 1.3 trillion in debt college debt
here's an interesting thing to a point
that you were making and and the Federal
Reserve in New York State do this
monthly report with manufacturers and
they slipped in a supplemental question
I was blown away by the response
there's a massive skills mismatch 68%
it's over two years ago is only 45
percent and the mismatch has to do with
the ability to work with machines and
tools and only 12% of those jobs need a
college degree to me that speaks a wide
opening for so many people sitting on
their sofa right now wondering what the
heck they're going to do with their life
there's a difference to be fair there's
a difference between workforce
development job development and a
liberal arts degree
I got a liberal arts degree I wouldn't
trade it it served me well but in 1984
when the bill came due I owed about
$12,000 for four and a half years of
school my exact same education today
cost a little north of 80,000 dollars so
we just can't
having the same conversation about
whether college is good or not of course
it's good the question is is it worth it
and if you have any kind of fiscal sense
about your own personal economy the math
isn't that complicated there a host of
skills that can be fast-tracked
we've put probably 200 welders through
our training program and many of them
are making north of six figures right
now and Charles you wouldn't believe how
difficult it is to give away $600,000
under the improv tour of work ethic I
mean that in and of itself and that's
why I wanted to come on your show I do
this every year we've raised close to
four million dollars in giving it away
is a nightmare because I ask people to
make a video and submit references and
write an essay and sign the sweat pledge
which stands for skills and work ethic
are not taboo by the way it's just
basically an attempt to get people to
put a little skin in the game right most
scholarships you know they focus on
academic they focus on talent they focus
on athleticism we look for work ethic
we're looking for people who want to
learn a skill that's in demand who will
show up early stay late and put in the
time and I'm telling you in many cases
this particular pile of free money is
not for you I got to tell you to your
point I've seen where business owners
are saying over and over again
someone who's punctual is now considered
a skill set I want to talk about your
podcast the way I it the way I heard it
very popular you know of course everyone
loved you because you're the guy who
sort of represented the heart of America
and you're continuing that with the
podcast well look I've always had a soft
spot for Paul Harvey I can't tell you
used to do a thing called the rest of
the story and you know these biographies
wrapped in these mysteries and it always
kept me in the car after I got to
wherever I was going because I had to
hear him tell me how the story ended so
I'm doing something called the way I
heard it it's very similar but it's love
letters to two great Americans and
entrepreneurs and famous events and
really history you know I think so much
of history winds up being boring but it
doesn't have to be so we're trying to
take a little bite out of that space as
well I don't I don't know anything about
podcasting in general but
somebody important just called me and
said you reach 50 million people
laughter used to do it again so I am